ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ACT III
ACT II
ACT IV
ACT I
ACT V
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
A challenge, on my life.
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
Advances
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
Afore me! it is so very very late,
A fortnight and odd days.
After the prompter, for our entrance:
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
A gentleman of noble parentage,
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
A greater power than we can contradict
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
A lightning before death: O, how may I
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Alla stoccata carries it away.
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
All things that we ordained festival,
All this I know; and to the marriage
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
A lover may bestride the gossamer
Am I like such a fellow?
Am I the master here, or you? go to.
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Amen!
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
A most courteous exposition.
An I might live to see thee married once,
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
And I am proof against their enmity.
And I for winking at your discords too
And I'll believe thee.
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
And all combined, save what thou must combine
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And all the better is it for the maid:
And all things change them to the contrary.
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
And an old hare hoar,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
And bad'st me bury love.
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
And bear this work of heaven with patience:
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
And by and by my master drew on him;
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
And fearfully did menace me with death,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
And for that name which is no part of thee
And for that offence
And from her womb children of divers kind
And from my soul too;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
And here is come to do some villanous shame
And her immortal part with angels lives.
And he shall signify from time to time
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
And his to me:
And hither shall he come: and he and I
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
And in the taste confounds the appetite:
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
And in this state she gallops night by night
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!
And joy comes well in such a needy time:
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
And know their spring, their head, their
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.
And let mischance be slave to patience.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
And makes himself an artificial night:
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
And never from this palace of dim night
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
And not impute this yielding to light love,
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And presently took post to tell it you:
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'
And private in his chamber pens himself,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
And reason coldly of your grievances,
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
And see how he will take it at your hands.
And see how one another lends content
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
And she as much in love, her means much less
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
And since that time it is eleven years;
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
And soar with them above a common bound.
And so did I.
And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
And soundly too: your houses!
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
And stole into the covert of the wood:
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
And that my master slew him.
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
And that we have a curse in having her:
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
And then I ran away to call the watch.
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
And then down falls again.
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And then in post he came from Mantua
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
And then will I be general of your woes,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
And this shall free thee from this present shame;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
And thou art wedded to calamity.
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
And usest none in that true use indeed
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
And we mean well in going to this mask;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
And what to?
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
And where the worser is predominant,
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
And with my child my joys are buried.
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
And world's exile is death: then banished,
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
And yet I would it were to give again.
And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
'An if a man did need a poison now,
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
An old hare hoar,
Anon!
Anon!
Anon, anon!
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Antony, and Potpan!
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Apothecary
Apothecary
Apothecary
Apothecary
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
Are made already mothers: by my count,
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
A rhyme I learn'd even now
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
As I intended, for it wrought on her
As I remember, this should be the house.
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
A sail, a sail!
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
[Aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:
[Aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
[Aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
[Aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
[Aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
[Aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side, if I say
As if that name,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
As is the night before some festival
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As living here and you no use of him.
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
As violently as hasty powder fired
As will disperse itself through all the veins
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
A thousand times good night!
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
At my poor house look to behold this night
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
At the hour of nine.
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
At thy good heart's oppression.
At what o'clock to-morrow
A villain that is hither come in spite,
A visor for a visor! what care I
A' was a merry man--took up the child:
Away, begone; the sport is at the best.
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Ay, a thousand times.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
Ay, ay, the cords.
Ay, boy, ready.
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Ay, forsooth.
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Ay, let the county take you in your bed;
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Ay me!
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Beats down their swords
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Because he married me before to Romeo?
Because it is an enemy to thee;
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
Benedicite!
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
Beshrew your heart for sending me about,
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Bid her devise
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Blister'd be thy tongue
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Both by myself and many other friends:
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
But I can give thee more:
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
But I will watch you from such watching now.
But I will write again to Mantua,
But Montague is bound as well as I,
But, O, it presses to my memory,
But Romeo may not; he is banished:
But Romeo may not: more validity,
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
But a hare that is hoar
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
But every man betake him to his legs.
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
But for the sunset of my brother's son
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
But let them measure us by what they will;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
But my true love is grown to such excess
But new struck nine.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
But now I see this one is one too much,
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
But sadly tell me who.
But saying o'er what I have said before:
But send him back.
But she's best married that dies married young.
But, soft! what day is this?
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
But 'tis no wit to go.
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
But to himself so secret and so close,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
But to the earth some special good doth give,
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
But when I came, some minute ere the time
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
By a name
By and by, I come:--
By any other name would smell as sweet;
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
By having him, making yourself no less.
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
By holy marriage: when and where and how
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
By my head, here come the Capulets.
By my heel, I care not.
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
By'r lady, thirty years.
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
Call, good Mercutio.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Came he not home to-night?
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Can I demand.
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Can heaven be so envious?
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
Chorus
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
Come, go, good Juliet,
Come, go with me.
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
Comes forward
Come, shall we go?
Come, sir, your passado.
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Come, vial.
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!
Come you to make confession to this father?
Commend me to thy lady.
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Depart again: here, here will I remain
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
Dies
Dies
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
Do not deny to him that you love me.
Do not swear at all;
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Dost thou not laugh?
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Doth make against me of this direful murder;
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
Doting like me and like me banished,
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Do with their death bury their parents' strife.
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Do you quarrel, sir?
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Drawing his sword
Drawing
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Draws
Drinks
Driving back shadows over louring hills:
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.
Enter ABRAHAM and BALTHASAR
Enter Apothecary
Enter BALTHASAR, booted
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO
Enter BENVOLIO
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, Nurse, and two Servingmen
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and others
Enter CAPULET, PARIS, and Servant
Enter CAPULET and Nurse
Enter CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET
Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house, meeting the Guests and Maskers
Enter CAPULET
Enter CAPULET
Enter Chorus
Enter Citizens, & c
Enter FRIAR JOHN
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS, with Musicians
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and ROMEO
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE, with a basket
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE
Enter JULIET and Nurse
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Enter LADY CAPULET
Enter LADY CAPULET
Enter LADY CAPULET
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, and Servants
Enter MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE
Enter MONTAGUE and others
Enter Nurse and PETER
Enter Nurse and PETER
Enter Nurse, to the chamber
Enter Nurse, with cords
Enter Nurse
Enter Nurse
Enter PARIS, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch
Enter PETER
Enter PRINCE, with Attendants
Enter Prince, attended; MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their Wives, and others
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, with five or six Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others
Enter ROMEO and BALTHASAR, with a torch, mattock, & c
Enter ROMEO and JULIET above, at the window
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter SAMPSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, armed with swords and bucklers
Enter TYBALT and others
Enter TYBALT
Enter Watch, with the Page of PARIS
Enter a Servant
Enter, at the other end of the churchyard, FRIAR LAURENCE, with a lantern, crow, and spade
Enter, several of both houses, who join the fray; then enter Citizens, with clubs
Enters the tomb
Enter the PRINCE and Attendants
Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits, logs, and baskets
Environed with all these hideous fears?
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Evermore showering? In one little body
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Every good hap to you that chances here:
Examine every married lineament,
Examine other beauties.
Exeunt CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, PARIS, and FRIAR LAURENCE
Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS
Exeunt JULIET and Nurse
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO
Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE
Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse
Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE, and BENVOLIO
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exit BALTHASAR
Exit FRIAR LAURENCE
Exit First Servant
Exit First Servant
Exit PETER
Exit Page
Exit ROMEO
Exit Romeo
Exit Second Servant
Exit Servant
Exit, above
Exit, above
Exit above
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Faith, I know not what to say.
Faith, here it is.
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.
Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies
Falls
Farewell!
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
Farewell, dear father!
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.
Farewell, my coz.
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
Fear me not.
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
Feeling so the loss,
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
First Citizen
First Citizen
First Citizen
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Servant
First Servant
First Servant
First Servant
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
For I have need of many orisons
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
For beauty starved with her severity
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
For exile hath more terror in his look,
For fair without the fair within to hide:
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
Forgetting any other home but this.
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
For here we need it not.
For in a minute there are many days:
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
For never was a story of more woe
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
For this night's watching.
For this time, all the rest depart away:
For though fond nature bids us an lament,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
For what, I pray thee?
For who is living, if those two are gone?
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
For you and I are past our dancing days:
For your broken shin.
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Full half an hour.
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
Give me a case to put my visage in:
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Give me my sin again.
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Give me the letter; I will look on it.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.
Go ask his name: if he be married.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
Go, be gone.
God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
God in heaven bless her!
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
God's bread! it makes me mad:
God shield I should disturb devotion!
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Good heart, at what?
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
Good-morrow, cousin.
Good morrow, father.
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Good night.
Good night:
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Good night, good night! parting is such
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
Go to; I say you shall.
Go to, go to;
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
Go with me to the vault.
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Groan! why, no.
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Have at thee, coward!
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Have you importuned him by any means?
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it
He goeth down
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
He is a kinsman to the Montague;
He is wise;
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Help, help! Call help.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
He made you for a highway to my bed;
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.
Here's goodly gear!
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?
Here's to my love!
Here were the servants of your adversary,
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Her mother is the lady of the house,
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
He shall be endured:
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
His son is thirty.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!
Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
Hold thy desperate hand:
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
How canst thou try them so?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
How long hath he been there?
How long is't now since last yourself and I
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?
How now! who calls?
How oft when men are at the point of death
How shall that faith return again to earth,
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
How stands your disposition to be married?
How! turn thy back and run?
How well my comfort is revived by this!
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I am for you.
I am hurt.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
I am not I, if there be such an I;
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
I am the greatest, able to do least,
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
I come from Lady Juliet.
I conjure only but to raise up him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
I dare no longer stay.
I dare not, sir
I departed not and left him there.
I do beseech thee--
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
I do bite my thumb, sir.
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
I do defy thy conjurations,
I do protest, I never injured thee,
I do remember an apothecary,--
I do remember well where I should be,
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
I dream'd a dream to-night.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
I dreamt my master and another fought,
I drew to part them: in the instant came
If I did stay to look on his intents.
If I do so, it will be of more price,
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
If ever you disturb our streets again,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
If my heart's dear love--
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!
If thou be merciful,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
I have.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
I have more care to stay than will to go:
I have my wish.
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
I know not.
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
I know not, sir.
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
I'll call them back again to comfort me:
I'll fa you; do you note me?
I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!
I'll not endure him.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
I'll to my rest.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
I mean, sir, in delay
I, measuring his affections by my own,
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
Immediately we do exile him hence:
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
In all her best array bear her to church:
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
In half an hour she promised to return.
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
In love?
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
In such a gorgeous palace!
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
In this so sudden business.
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
In what I further shall intend to do,
In what vile part of this anatomy
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
I pray thee, leave me to my self to-night,
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I promise you, but for your company,
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.
Is but a little way above our heads,
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
Is death to any he that utters them.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
Is fair and honest, and in his mistres s' name
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Is he gone, and hath nothing?
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Is it good den?
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Is my dear son with such sour company:
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
I speak no treason.
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
Is she a Capulet?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
Is the day so young?
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Is to himself--I will not say how true--
Is too much for a score,
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
I strike quickly, being moved.
Is very good meat in lent
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
I take thee at thy word:
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.
I think it best you married with the county.
I think you are happy in this second match,
I thought all for the best.
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
It is an honour that I dream not of.
It is enough I may but call her mine.
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
It is my soul that calls upon my name:
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
It rains downright.
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.
I wake before the time that Romeo
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
I was your mother much upon these years
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
I will confess to you that I love him.
I will follow you.
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
I will give you the minstrel.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
I will omit no opportunity
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
I will then give it you soundly.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
I would I were thy bird.
I would adventure for such merchandise.
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.
I would not for the wealth of all the town
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
JULIET appears above at a window
JULIET wakes
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Juliet, the county stays.
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Kisses him
Knocking within
Knocking
Knocking
Knocking
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY MONTAGUE
LADY MONTAGUE
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
Laying PARIS in the tomb
Laying down her dagger
Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Life and these lips have long been separated:
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Like softest music to attending ears!
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Look, and thou shalt see.
Look, look! O heavy day!
Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell.
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MONTAGUE  
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
Madam!
Madam, I am here.
Madam, I am not well.
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Make haste, I say.
Make haste, make haste.
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Making them women of good carriage:
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Many for many virtues excellent,
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
Marry, bachelor,
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
May be put from her by society:
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
May not one speak?
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
Meaning, to court'sy.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
Monday, my lord,
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
More fierce and more inexorable far
More honourable state, more courtship lives
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
Most lamentable day, most woful day,
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins
Musician
Music plays, and they dance
Music within
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
My dear?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
My fan, Peter.
My father Capulet will have it so;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My life were better ended by their hate,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
My master knows not but I am gone hence;
My master's.
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
My only love sprung from my only hate!
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
Myself condemned and myself excused.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
My will to her consent is but a part;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
NURSE
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Nay, good goose, bite not.
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
Nay, that's not so.
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Never was seen so black a day as this:
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
No.
No.
No better.
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.
No, coz, I rather weep.
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
No, for then we should be colliers.
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
Noise again
Noise within
No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
No, marry; I fear thee!
No matter: get thee gone,
No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
No, my good lord.
None but for some and yet all different.
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
No, no: but all this did I know before.
No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.
Not in a grave,
Noting this penury, to myself I said
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
No truly sir; not a penny.
Not so big as a round little worm
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
Now, fellow,
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Now must I to the monument alone;
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
Nurse!
Nurse?
Nurse! What should she do here?
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Nurse calls within
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
O God, she comes!
O God's lady dear!
O, God ye god-den.
O, I am fortune's fool!
O, I am slain!
O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O any thing, of nothing first create!
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
O, by this count I shall be much in years
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
O cousin, cousin!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Of a despised life closed in my breast
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
Of disobedient opposition
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Of honourable reckoning are you both;
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Of love?
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Of one I danced withal.
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Of yonder knight?
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
O honey nurse, what news?
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
O lamentable day!
O lamentable day!
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
On Thursday next be married to this county.
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
One calls within 'Juliet.'
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
One of our order, to associate me,
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
One that you love.
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
O noble prince, I can discover all
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Opens the tomb
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Or else beshrew them both.
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Or never after look me in the face:
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
Or shall we on without a apology?
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
O, she knew well
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
O, teach me how I should forget to think.
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
O, that she knew she were!
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
O true apothecary!
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our whole city is much bound to him.
Out--
Out of her favour, where I am in love.
Out on her, hilding!
Out upon you! what a man are you!
Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
O woful day, O woful day!
O woful time!
PAGE
PAGE
PAGE
PAGE
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PROLOGUE
PROLOGUE
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
Part, fools!
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
Peter!
Peter!
Peter, stay at the gate.
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.
Pink for flower.
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
Put not another sin upon my head,
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
Put up your swords; you know not what you do.
Quarrel sir! no, sir.
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Reads
Ready to go, but never to return.
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Re-enter BENVOLIO
Re-enter JULIET, above
Re-enter JULIET, above
Re-enter Nurse
Re-enter TYBALT
Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE
Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR
Remembering how I love thy company.
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
Rest you merry!
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Retires
Retires
Retires
Retiring
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Right.
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Romeo!
Romeo.
Romeo!
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
Romeo, away, be gone!
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
Romeo can,
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
Romeo is coming.
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Romeo will answer it.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SCENE I. A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
SCENE I. A public place.
SCENE I. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE II. A street.
SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE II. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house.
SCENE III. A churchyard; in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets.
SCENE III. A room in Capulet's house.
SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE III. Juliet's chamber.
SCENE I. Mantua. A street.
SCENE IV. A room in Capulet's house.
SCENE IV. A street.
SCENE IV. A street.
SCENE IV. Hall in Capulet's house.
SCENE I. Verona. A public place.
SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house.
SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE V. Juliet's chamber.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Second Capulet
Second Capulet
Second Musician
Second Musician
Second Musician
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Watchman
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Send for the county; go tell him of this:
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
Shall I send to thee?
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Shall have the chinks.
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
Shalt with him hence.
Shame come to Romeo!
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
She could have run and waddled all about;
She falls upon her bed, within the curtains
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!
She shall be married to this noble earl.
She's not fourteen.
She's not well married that lives married long;
She speaks:
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
She was too good for me: but, as I said,
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
She will indite him to some supper.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Singing
Sings
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
Snatching ROMEO's dagger
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
So early walking did I see your son:
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
So far from sounding and discovery,
So fearful were they of infection.
Soft! I will go along;
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
So many guests invite as here are writ.
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Some comfort, nurse.
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
Some misadventure.
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
So please you, let me now be left alone,
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
So stumblest on my counsel?
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
So thrive my soul--
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Spare not for the cost.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Speakest thou from thy heart?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Stabs herself
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
Stay but a little, I will come again.
Stay, fellow; I can read.
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
Stop there, stop there.
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
Strike, drum.
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Such as I love; and you, among the store,
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
Sweet, so would I:
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies with his followers
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
Take all myself.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
That God had lent us but this only child;
That I have worn a visor and could tell
That I might touch that cheek!
That I must love a loathed enemy.
That I revived, and was an emperor.
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
That I will show you shining at this feast,
That I yet know not?
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!
That all the world will be in love with night
That almost freezes up the heat of life:
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That calls our person from our morning's rest?
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
That dreamers often lie.
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
That he should hither come as this dire night,
That idles in the wanton summer air,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
That most are busied when they're most alone,
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
That's a certain text.
That same villain, Romeo.
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
That we may call it early by and by.
That were some spite: my invocation
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.
That while Verona by that name is known,
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
The Page whistles
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
The county will be here with music straight,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
The date is out of such prolixity:
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
The fee-simple! O simple!
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
The hateful mansion.
The heads of the maids?
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
The lady stirs.
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
The letter was not nice but full of charge
The life of Tybalt.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
The most you sought was her promotion;
Then I will give you the serving-creature.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Then dreams, he of another benefice:
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Then music with her silver sound'--
'Then music with her silver sound
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
The only son of your great enemy.
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
The other did not so.
The people in the street cry Romeo,
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
There is no world without Verona walls,
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
There lies that Tybalt.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
There shall no figure at such rate be set
There's no trust,
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
These dead men's tombs.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
These violent delights have violent ends
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
The tears have got small victory by that;
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
The traces of the smallest spider's web,
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
The what?
The which if you with patient ears attend,
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
They are free men, but I am banished.
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
They fight; TYBALT falls
They fight
They fight
They fight
They fight
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
They must take it in sense that feel it.
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Third Musician
Third Watchman
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
This but begins the woe, others must end.
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
This is she--
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
This is thy sheath;
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
This shall determine that.
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Throws them down
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Thy lips are warm.
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
Till holy church incorporate two in one.
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.
Till the prince came, who parted either part.
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
'Tis now near night.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
'Tis the way
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
To County Paris: then comes she to me,
To County Paris, to prepare him up
[To JULIET] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
To Lammas-tide?
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
To Servant, giving a paper
[To a Servingman] What lady is that, which doth
To an impatient child that hath new robes
To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
To answer that, I should confess to you.
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
To be consorted with the humorous night:
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
To bid me trudge:
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
Together with the terror of the place,--
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
To have her match'd: and having now provided
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
To help me sort such needful ornaments
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
To know our further pleasure in this case,
To lay one in, another out to have.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
To make confession and to be absolved.
To make die with a restorative.
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
To meet her new-beloved any where:
To merit bliss by making me despair:
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
To-morrow will I send.
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
To murder, murder our solemnity?
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Too familiar
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
To press before thy father to a grave?
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
To rid her from this second marriage,
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
To seek him here that means not to be found.
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
To see thy son and heir more early down.
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
To stop the inundation of her tears;
To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
To supper; to our house.
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
To this same place, to this same monument.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
True, I talk of dreams,
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Turn from their office to black funeral;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Tush, I will stir about,
Tush, thou art deceived:
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Two households, both alike in dignity,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Undraws the curtains
Uneven is the course, I like it not.
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Unto my cell.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Up.
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Up, sir, go with me;
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
Warm and new kill'd.
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
We follow thee.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
Welcome, then.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
Well, sir.
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
Well, what was yours?
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
Were in a mask?
Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
We shall be short in our provision:
We still have known thee for a holy man.
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
We would as willingly give cure as know.
What?
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
What a pestilent knave is this same!
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
What, art thou hurt?
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
What further woe conspires against mine age?
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
What hast thou found?
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
What, ho! apothecary!
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
What if it be a poison, which the friar
What if this mixture do not work at all?
What is her burying grave that is her womb,
What is her mother?
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
What is the matter?
What is your will?
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
What mean these masterless and gory swords
What misadventure is so early up,
What must be shall be.
What noise is here?
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
What said my man, when my betossed soul
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
What says he of our marriage? what of that?
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
What shall I swear by?
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
What's he that now is going out of door?
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
What's there?
What's this? what's this?
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
What villain madam?
What will you give us?
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
What wouldst thou have with me?
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
When it hoars ere it be spent.
When presently through all thy veins shall run
When the devout religion of mine eye
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
Where is your mother?'
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,
Which craves as desperate an execution.
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
Which is as thin of substance as the air
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Which modern lamentations might have moved?
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
Which on more view, of many mine being one
Which she hath praised him with above compare
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
Which the commission of thy years and art
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Which you weep for.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
Whither?
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Who calls so loud?
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
Who is it?
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
Whose house?
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Why 'Heart's ease?'
Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
Why dost thou stay?
Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Why, how now, Juliet!
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
Why, may one ask?
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Why, such is love's transgression.
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Why, what is Tybalt?
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Will you tell me that?
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.
With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
With blood removed but little from her own?
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
[Within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
[Within] Lead, boy: which way?
[Within] Let me come in, and you shall know
[Within] Madam!
[Within] Madam!
With instruments upon them, fit to open
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
With open outcry toward our monument.
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
With speedy help doth lend redress.'
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
With this night's revels and expire the term
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
Would through the airy region stream so bright
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!
Yes, better, sir.
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
You Capulet; shall go along with me:
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
You are too hot.
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
You kiss by the book.
You lie.
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
Young Romeo is it?
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
Your lady's love against some other maid
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
Your mother.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'
You say well.
You say you do not know the lady's mind:
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
You tallow-face!
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
You will not, then?
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
assembly: whither should they come?
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
ay?
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
bite my thumb, sir.
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
bones, their bones!
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
can lick their fingers.
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
constrains a man to bow in the hams.
court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
dares, being dared.
dial is now upon the prick of noon.
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
ears ere it be out.
ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
encounter Tybalt?
enrich the hand
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
fairer face.
fairly last night.
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
fingers goes not with me.
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
good quarrel, and the law on my side.
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
hai!
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
his tongue,
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
inch narrow to an ell broad!
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
'lady, lady, lady.'
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
maids, and cut off their heads.
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
mar.
may find the young Romeo?
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
me like men:
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
mourners, and stay dinner.
my errand;
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
not there for the goose.
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.
pray, can you read any thing you see?
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
protest unto thee--
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
sent to find those persons whose names are here
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
sharp sauce.
shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
sick health!
singleness.
something; make it a word and a blow.
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
soon moody to be moved.
sought for, in the great chamber.
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
sweet sorrow,
take it in what sense thou wilt.
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
the--No; I know it begins with some other
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
their books,
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
there rust, and let me die.
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
the streets,
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
they list.
though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
to comfort me.
to dinner, thither.
to hear it.
to in a month.
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
to the wall.
to the wall.
to think!--
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
true descent;
two of the house of the Montagues.
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
very first house, of the first and second cause:
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?
was I with you there for the goose?
was hurt under your arm.
ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
will give me occasion.
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
wisely, wisely.
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
writ, and can never find what names the writing
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
you.
you have found him than he was when you sought him:
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and












































































































































































Exeunt CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, PARIS, and FRIAR LAURENCE
Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE
Exit FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PRINCE
PAGE
PAGE
PAGE
PAGE
NURSE
Enter MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE
Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE
LADY MONTAGUE
LADY MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE
MONTAGUE  
MONTAGUE
PROLOGUE
PROLOGUE
ACT III
ACT II
ACT I
And so did I.
Sweet, so would I:
And hither shall he come: and he and I
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
How long is't now since last yourself and I
A visor for a visor! what care I
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
I am not I, if there be such an I;
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
But Montague is bound as well as I,
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
A lightning before death: O, how may I
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
ABRAHAM
Enter FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
SAMPSON
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and ROMEO
!Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Enter ROMEO
Exit ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
ROMEO
Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE, and BENVOLIO
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO
Enter BENVOLIO
Re-enter BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
BENVOLIO
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Enter ABRAHAM and BALTHASAR
Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR
Exit BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
BALTHASAR
Enter Nurse and PETER
Enter Nurse and PETER
Enter PETER
Exit PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
PETER
!Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS
!Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS
Enter Watch, with the Page of PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
PARIS
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
Enter JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
JULIET
Enter CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET
Enter LADY CAPULET
Enter LADY CAPULET
Enter LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
LADY CAPULET
Enter CAPULET
Enter CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
CAPULET
Enter TYBALT
Re-enter TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
TYBALT
ACT IV
ACT V
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
GREGORY
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
1With all the admired beauties of Verona:
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
And then in post he came from Mantua
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
But I will write again to Mantua,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
AThe traces of the smallest spider's web,
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
!Laying PARIS in the tomb
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
Opens the tomb
Enters the tomb
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
What is her burying grave that is her womb,
!Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
AThat monthly changes in her circled orb,
AMade by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Enter ROMEO and BALTHASAR, with a torch, mattock, & c
Enter Citizens, & c
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
Put not another sin upon my head,
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
AWith nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Stay, fellow; I can read.
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
1O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!
God's bread! it makes me mad:
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
1A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
inch narrow to an ell broad!
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.
1And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
AAy, let the county take you in your bed;
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
He made you for a highway to my bed;
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
To have her match'd: and having now provided
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
And usest none in that true use indeed
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Shall be the label to another deed,
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
Doting like me and like me banished,
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
They are free men, but I am banished.
And world's exile is death: then banished,
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
But Romeo may not; he is banished:
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
ASpeak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Go ask his name: if he be married.
How stands your disposition to be married?
And with my child my joys are buried.
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
1Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
1A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
dares, being dared.
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
!Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
As violently as hasty powder fired
He shall be endured:
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
Myself condemned and myself excused.
Life and these lips have long been separated:
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
Enter BALTHASAR, booted
ATush, thou art deceived:
To make confession and to be absolved.
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.
soon moody to be moved.
Which modern lamentations might have moved?
I strike quickly, being moved.
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
And all the better is it for the maid:
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
AYour lady's love against some other maid
Noting this penury, to myself I said
AShe was too good for me: but, as I said,
ANay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
A' was a merry man--took up the child:
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
ATybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
That God had lent us but this only child;
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
1Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
1The time and my intents are savage-wild,
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Warm and new kill'd.
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
ATo wield old partisans, in hands as old,
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
AMy child is yet a stranger in the world;
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
enrich the hand
AHold thy desperate hand:
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
[To JULIET] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
ATo think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
Can I demand.
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
my errand;
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
To-morrow will I send.
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
This but begins the woe, others must end.
The which if you with patient ears attend,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
And from her womb children of divers kind
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
1You say you do not know the lady's mind:
1To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
!And soar with them above a common bound.
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
To seek him here that means not to be found.
What hast thou found?
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
'Then music with her silver sound
Then music with her silver sound'--
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
1Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
AShut up in prison, kept without my food,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
And stole into the covert of the wood:
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
SCENE I. A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
Have at thee, coward!
Comes forward
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.
The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
1And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
!I would I were thy bird.
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
No, my good lord.
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
Monday, my lord,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
!Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
Drawing his sword
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
A'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
AI take thee at thy word:
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
1A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
Who calls so loud?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
[Aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
I do remember well where I should be,
What must be shall be.
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.
!By playing it to me with so sour a face.
1Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Or never after look me in the face:
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
fairer face.
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
You tallow-face!
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
!And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
In such a gorgeous palace!
ASCENE I. A public place.
SCENE I. Verona. A public place.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
1Together with the terror of the place,--
1Either withdraw unto some private place,
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
Then dreams, he of another benefice:
AAn she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Music plays, and they dance
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
After the prompter, for our entrance:
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
And for that offence
1My master knows not but I am gone hence;
Immediately we do exile him hence:
Shalt with him hence.
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
And bear this work of heaven with patience:
And let mischance be slave to patience.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
An I might live to see thee married once,
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
sharp sauce.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
!Younger than she are happy mothers made.
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Enter, at the other end of the churchyard, FRIAR LAURENCE, with a lantern, crow, and spade
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
For fair without the fair within to hide:
!Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
good quarrel, and the law on my side.
To Lammas-tide?
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
I do protest, I never injured thee,
!As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
And I'll believe thee.
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
And for that name which is no part of thee
I do beseech thee--
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
Shall I send to thee?
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
protest unto thee--
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Because it is an enemy to thee;
No, marry; I fear thee!
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
We follow thee.
For what, I pray thee?
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
Look, and thou shalt see.
pray, can you read any thing you see?
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
1That almost freezes up the heat of life:
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
!A challenge, on my life.
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Do with their death bury their parents' strife.
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Exit Page
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
Making them women of good carriage:
To rid her from this second marriage,
All this I know; and to the marriage
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
To bid me trudge:
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
!Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
This is she--
The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
there rust, and let me die.
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
!And the rank poison of the old will die.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
!Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
!That dreamers often lie.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
1As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
You lie.
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
The fee-simple! O simple!
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
AI drew to part them: in the instant came
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
And this shall free thee from this present shame;
By a name
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Is fair and honest, and in his mistres s' name
As if that name,
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
It is my soul that calls upon my name:
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
One of our order, to associate me,
I'll fa you; do you note me?
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
!So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Do not deny to him that you love me.
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
1And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
What wouldst thou have with me?
You Capulet; shall go along with me:
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Come, go with me.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
ACome, cordial and not poison, go with me
Up, sir, go with me;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
fingers goes not with me.
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
O woful time!
And he shall signify from time to time
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
1And joy comes well in such a needy time:
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
ABut that a joy past joy calls out on me,
!What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
By and by, I come:--
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
AAnd keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
assembly: whither should they come?
ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?
To County Paris: then comes she to me,
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
And his to me:
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
!A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
1And this same needy man must sell it me.
1I'll call them back again to comfort me:
to comfort me.
Ay me!
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
!Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
!God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
AAs mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
It is enough I may but call her mine.
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
At the hour of nine.
But new struck nine.
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
Go, be gone.
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Romeo, away, be gone!
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
No matter: get thee gone,
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
Which on more view, of many mine being one
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
[Aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
!My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
1Which, too much minded by herself alone,
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
1Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
ASo please you, let me now be left alone,
Now must I to the monument alone;
That most are busied when they're most alone,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
!Till holy church incorporate two in one.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
For never was a story of more woe
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
1Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
Which she hath praised him with above compare
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
1As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
sent to find those persons whose names are here
ABy holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
Madam, I am here.
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Nurse! What should she do here?
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
AEvery good hap to you that chances here:
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
What noise is here?
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
I departed not and left him there.
How long hath he been there?
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
Stop there, stop there.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
What's there?
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
To meet her new-beloved any where:
Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
O, that she knew she were!
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
1Is too much for a score,
!And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
1But saying o'er what I have said before:
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.
No, no: but all this did I know before.
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
But I can give thee more:
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
Such as I love; and you, among the store,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Then I will give you the serving-creature.
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
Some misadventure.
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
To know our further pleasure in this case,
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
!ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Why 'Heart's ease?'
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Bid her devise
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
He is wise;
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
But to himself so secret and so close,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
!not there for the goose.
was I with you there for the goose?
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
AWeeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
AA piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
Enter JULIET and Nurse
Exeunt JULIET and Nurse
Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse
Enter CAPULET and Nurse
Enter Nurse
Enter Nurse
Re-enter Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse!
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse?
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
Nurse
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
Some comfort, nurse.
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
very first house, of the first and second cause:
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Suspecting that we both were in a house
AAs I remember, this should be the house.
great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
Her mother is the lady of the house,
Whose house?
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
!To supper; to our house.
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house.
SCENE IV. Hall in Capulet's house.
SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house.
SCENE III. A room in Capulet's house.
SCENE IV. A room in Capulet's house.
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
O any thing, of nothing first create!
!Peter, stay at the gate.
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
AIt shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
AMy life were better ended by their hate,
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Afore me! it is so very very late,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Benedicite!
The more I have, for both are infinite.
A villain that is hither come in spite,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
AAnd in the taste confounds the appetite:
What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
Make haste, make haste.
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
AThou art thyself, though not a Montague.
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
He is a kinsman to the Montague;
AStop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
his tongue,
Blister'd be thy tongue
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
1Is to himself--I will not say how true--
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
1And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
I have.
AHold, there is forty ducats: let me have
To lay one in, another out to have.
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Not in a grave,
To press before thy father to a grave?
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
I would the fool were married to her grave!
To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
But to the earth some special good doth give,
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
To make die with a restorative.
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Re-enter JULIET, above
Re-enter JULIET, above
Exit, above
Exit, above
Exit above
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
!My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
Of love?
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
In love?
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Out of her favour, where I am in love.
If my heart's dear love--
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
AAcquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.
To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
One that you love.
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Here's to my love!
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
!And bad'st me bury love.
Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
For this alliance may so happy prove,
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
When the devout religion of mine eye
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
1Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
AWho is already sick and pale with grief,
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
AAnd private in his chamber pens himself,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Stabs herself
AIn these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
Take all myself.
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
AThat Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
It is an honour that I dream not of.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
Out on her, hilding!
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
Singing
For this night's watching.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
!Thou talk'st of nothing.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
!Too great oppression for a tender thing.
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Knocking
Knocking
Knocking
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Romeo is coming.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Retiring
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
writ, and can never find what names the writing
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Drawing
AUnder yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Soft! I will go along;
She's not well married that lives married long;
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
AAnd pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
But she's best married that dies married young.
Is the day so young?
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
ABut, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
Enter PARIS, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
In all her best array bear her to church:
!Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
I think you are happy in this second match,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
And then I ran away to call the watch.
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
But now I see this one is one too much,
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
Good night, good night! parting is such
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Dost thou not laugh?
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
AIs love a tender thing? it is too rough,
!'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
I have my wish.
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
AThou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Why I descend into this bed of death,
How oft when men are at the point of death
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
And fearfully did menace me with death,
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
1Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
This is thy sheath;
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
sick health!
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
to in a month.
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Or else beshrew them both.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
AThy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Of honourable reckoning are you both;
[To a Servingman] What lady is that, which doth
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Ay, forsooth.
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
How shall that faith return again to earth,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
hai!
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.
May not one speak?
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
But send him back.
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.
That I might touch that cheek!
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
1Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
O, teach me how I should forget to think.
to think!--
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
You kiss by the book.
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
For exile hath more terror in his look,
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
AOr walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Why, may one ask?
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Were in a mask?
And we mean well in going to this mask;
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Of one I danced withal.
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Come, vial.
1Turn from their office to black funeral;
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
All things that we ordained festival,
As is the night before some festival
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
I will give you the minstrel.
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
So stumblest on my counsel?
A sail, a sail!
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
Go to; I say you shall.
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
O noble prince, I can discover all
AWhat if this mixture do not work at all?
Do not swear at all;
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
to the wall.
to the wall.
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
!Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.
SCENE I. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE II. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Unto my cell.
Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
AO nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
That I have worn a visor and could tell
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.
Farewell!
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
Madam, I am not well.
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
O, she knew well
You say well.
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
ATwo such opposed kings encamp them still
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
What is your will?
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
ABid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
But let them measure us by what they will;
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
Peace, you mumbling fool!
AAnd then to have a wretched puling fool,
O, I am fortune's fool!
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
AShe shall be married to this noble earl.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
If thou be merciful,
What said my man, when my betossed soul
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
So thrive my soul--
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
!Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
[Within] Madam!
[Within] Madam!
Madam!
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
What villain madam?
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
1Being in night, all this is but a dream,
O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
1Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Is death to any he that utters them.
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
I'll not endure him.
AThe ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I will confess to you that I love him.
As living here and you no use of him.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
1Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
1Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
And by and by my master drew on him;
Our whole city is much bound to him.
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
I conjure only but to raise up him.
AThis cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Kisses him
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
you have found him than he was when you sought him:
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
And that my master slew him.
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
!was hurt under your arm.
Thy lips are warm.
With this night's revels and expire the term
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
Not so big as a round little worm
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Strike, drum.
Romeo can,
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
Second Musician
Second Musician
Second Musician
Third Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
First Musician
Musician
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
Madam, if you could find out but a man
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Second Watchman
Third Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
First Watchman
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
1For he hath still been tried a holy man.
AWe still have known thee for a holy man.
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
Antony, and Potpan!
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
O, God ye god-den.
Is it good den?
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
1Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
She's not fourteen.
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Welcome, then.
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
You will not, then?
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
Amen!
me like men:
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
1We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, Nurse, and two Servingmen
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
!No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
With instruments upon them, fit to open
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
First Citizen
First Citizen
First Citizen
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
1But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
1But to be frank, and give it thee again.
Stay but a little, I will come again.
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
Noise again
And yet I would it were to give again.
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
Give me my sin again.
What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
And then down falls again.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
O, I am slain!
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
Depart again: here, here will I remain
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
1Which are the children of an idle brain,
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Give me a case to put my visage in:
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
For your broken shin.
Music within
Noise within
Knocking within
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Nurse calls within
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
1Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
!To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
O cousin, cousin!
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Good-morrow, cousin.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
will give me occasion.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
We shall be short in our provision:
The hateful mansion.
Why, such is love's transgression.
At thy good heart's oppression.
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
That were some spite: my invocation
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
So fearful were they of infection.
Of disobedient opposition
A most courteous exposition.
The most you sought was her promotion;
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Which craves as desperate an execution.
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
Anon!
Anon!
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Anon, anon!
AThou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
I speak no treason.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
So early walking did I see your son:
But for the sunset of my brother's son
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
AIt was the lark, the herald of the morn,
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.
AIs it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.
In half an hour she promised to return.
Ready to go, but never to return.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
How! turn thy back and run?
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
AMadam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
He goeth down
Throws them down
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
!To see thy son and heir more early down.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
AThat while Verona by that name is known,
With blood removed but little from her own?
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
I would not for the wealth of all the town
I, measuring his affections by my own,
No.
No.
!Come, sir, your passado.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
In what I further shall intend to do,
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
Put up your swords; you know not what you do.
That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
may find the young Romeo?
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--
That same villain, Romeo.
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
ATill I conveniently could send to Romeo:
Shame come to Romeo!
Because he married me before to Romeo?
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?
I wake before the time that Romeo
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Exit Romeo
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
The people in the street cry Romeo,
Romeo!
Romeo.
Romeo!
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.
Come, shall we go?
Go, you cot-quean, go,
I have more care to stay than will to go:
But 'tis no wit to go.
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
But sadly tell me who.
!Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Call, good Mercutio.
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
Groan! why, no.
Nay, I'll conjure too.
And from my soul too;
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
And I for winking at your discords too
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
How canst thou try them so?
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
My father Capulet will have it so;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
The other did not so.
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
Nay, that's not so.
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
Go to, go to;
Am I the master here, or you? go to.
And what to?
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
Up.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
AAnd then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
No, coz, I rather weep.
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
Help, help! Call help.
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!
What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?
heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;
Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
[Within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
What misadventure is so early up,
Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
My dear?
O God's lady dear!
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
1If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
Here's goodly gear!
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
AAn open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
More fierce and more inexorable far
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
Too familiar
What if it be a poison, which the friar
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
mar.
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
But a hare that is hoar
News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
Enter Nurse, to the chamber
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
SCENE III. Juliet's chamber.
SCENE V. Juliet's chamber.
sought for, in the great chamber.
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
[Aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
Doth make against me of this direful murder;
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Laying down her dagger
!Snatching ROMEO's dagger
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
And that we have a curse in having her:
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
1Live here in heaven and may look on her;
As I intended, for it wrought on her
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
AGod in heaven bless her!
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Farewell, dear father!
This letter he early bid me give his father,
Come you to make confession to this father?
Good morrow, father.
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Whither?
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
AOr I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
to dinner, thither.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
the--No; I know it begins with some other
What is her mother?
Your mother.
warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?
Where is your mother?'
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
!And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
A lover may bestride the gossamer
mourners, and stay dinner.
1Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
To Servant, giving a paper
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
She will indite him to some supper.
1To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
My fan, Peter.
Peter!
Peter!
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
What is the matter?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
No better.
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Pink for flower.
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
AWhich is as thin of substance as the air
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
AShow me a mistress that is passing fair,
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
!And know their spring, their head, their
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
!I do bite my thumb, sir.
bite my thumb, sir.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Do you quarrel, sir?
Well, sir.
Quarrel sir! no, sir.
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
Yes, better, sir.
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
I dare not, sir
I know not, sir.
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
Which you weep for.
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Marry, bachelor,
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
!What's he that now is going out of door?
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
Full half an hour.
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
These dead men's tombs.
Enter, several of both houses, who join the fray; then enter Citizens, with clubs
Reads
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
maids, and cut off their heads.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
Is but a little way above our heads,
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
The heads of the maids?
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And see how he will take it at your hands.
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
Both by myself and many other friends:
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
AThese violent delights have violent ends
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Ay, ay, the cords.
Enter Nurse, with cords
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Beats down their swords
What mean these masterless and gory swords
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
1When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
Advances
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
Dies
Dies
Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Drawn with a team of little atomies
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
AWhat curious eye doth quote deformities?
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
Examine other beauties.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
JULIET wakes
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
The Page whistles
Ay, a thousand times.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
O God, she comes!
hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
bones, their bones!
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!
AAnd then will I be general of your woes,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Retires
Retires
Retires
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
And soundly too: your houses!
ALovers can see to do their amorous rites
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
two of the house of the Montagues.
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
More honourable state, more courtship lives
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.
AAnd her immortal part with angels lives.
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
AFind written in the margent of his eyes.
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
But every man betake him to his legs.
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
Sings
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
Send for the county; go tell him of this:
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Never was seen so black a day as this:
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
But, soft! what day is this?
What's this? what's this?
[Aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Forgetting any other home but this.
How well my comfort is revived by this!
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
AO, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
Faith, here it is.
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Then, as the manner of our country is,
She speaks:
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Shall have the chinks.
Drinks
their books,
!Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
Falls
How now! who calls?
!They fight; TYBALT falls
There is no world without Verona walls,
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
ADriving back shadows over louring hills:
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Part, fools!
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
True, I talk of dreams,
constrains a man to bow in the hams.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Have you importuned him by any means?
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS, with Musicians
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
She falls upon her bed, within the curtains
Undraws the curtains
Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
As will disperse itself through all the veins
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
I do defy thy conjurations,
ADraw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
For I have need of many orisons
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
1And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Environed with all these hideous fears?
Like softest music to attending ears!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
To stop the inundation of her tears;
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I was your mother much upon these years
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
And since that time it is eleven years;
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
O, by this count I shall be much in years
!By'r lady, thirty years.
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
AAnd shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
can lick their fingers.
Enter MONTAGUE and others
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and others
Enter TYBALT and others
Enter Prince, attended; MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their Wives, and others
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, with five or six Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others
No, for then we should be colliers.
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house, meeting the Guests and Maskers
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Enter SAMPSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, armed with swords and bucklers
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
My master's.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies with his followers
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
The lady stirs.
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
1Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
Well, what was yours?
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
ABeing held a foe, he may not have access
1But my true love is grown to such excess
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
And she as much in love, her means much less
By having him, making yourself no less.
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
singleness.
In this so sudden business.
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.
1One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
With speedy help doth lend redress.'
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.
Feeling so the loss,
!Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
the streets,
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits, logs, and baskets
By my head, here come the Capulets.
SCENE III. A churchyard; in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Enter the PRINCE and Attendants
Enter PRINCE, with Attendants
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, and Servants
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
1Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
What will you give us?
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.
Can heaven be so envious?
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
ANow, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
AAnd a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
Enter Chorus
Chorus
Draws
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
O honey nurse, what news?
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
A fortnight and odd days.
AFor you and I are past our dancing days:
For in a minute there are many days:
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
Juliet, the county stays.
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
What?
Will you tell me that?
This shall determine that.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
The tears have got small victory by that;
The what?
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
Good heart, at what?
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
ASo smile the heavens upon this holy act,
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
A greater power than we can contradict
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
SCENE II. A street.
SCENE IV. A street.
SCENE IV. A street.
SCENE I. Mantua. A street.
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
By any other name would smell as sweet;
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Come, go, good Juliet,
1Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
One calls within 'Juliet.'
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Why, how now, Juliet!
!I come from Lady Juliet.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE, with a basket
me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Is she a Capulet?
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Second Capulet
Second Capulet
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
1Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
There shall no figure at such rate be set
Either be gone before the watch be set,
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
Right.
The county will be here with music straight,
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.
They fight
They fight
They fight
They fight
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
And gave him what becomed love I might,
1The horrible conceit of death and night,
Good night.
Good night:
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
A thousand times good night!
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
That he should hither come as this dire night,
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
That all the world will be in love with night
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
Of yonder knight?
And makes himself an artificial night:
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
And never from this palace of dim night
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
!Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Came he not home to-night?
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
I pray thee, leave me to my self to-night,
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
I dream'd a dream to-night.
'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
AI have no joy of this contract to-night:
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
'Tis now near night.
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
At my poor house look to behold this night
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
ATo be consorted with the humorous night:
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
fairly last night.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
And in this state she gallops night by night
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Would through the airy region stream so bright
It rains downright.
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!
1O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
AUnworthy as she is, that we have wrought
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
!They must take it in sense that feel it.
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it
Give me the letter; I will look on it.
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
to hear it.
!Let me stand here till thou remember it.
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Romeo will answer it.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Young Romeo is it?
Who is it?
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
AWith Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
The life of Tybalt.
encounter Tybalt?
Why, what is Tybalt?
There lies that Tybalt.
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
take it in what sense thou wilt.
AOr my true heart with treacherous revolt
Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
!Go with me to the vault.
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
And where the worser is predominant,
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
Enter a Servant
Enter CAPULET, PARIS, and Servant
Exit Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Second Servant
Exit Servant
Exit First Servant
Exit First Servant
First Servant
First Servant
First Servant
First Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
Servant
true descent;
Many for many virtues excellent,
Is very good meat in lent
Examine every married lineament,
For though fond nature bids us an lament,
ABrags of his substance, not of ornament:
Here in my house do him disparagement:
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
!Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
To this same place, to this same monument.
With open outcry toward our monument.
It burneth in the Capel's monument.
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
When it hoars ere it be spent.
ANone but for some and yet all different.
Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
And see how one another lends content
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Exeunt
Are made already mothers: by my count,
You are too hot.
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
Fear me not.
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.
By my heel, I care not.
Nay, good goose, bite not.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!
!For here we need it not.
Uneven is the course, I like it not.
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
I know not.
That I yet know not?
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
Which the commission of thy years and art
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
Speakest thou from thy heart?
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
AGod Pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Till the prince came, who parted either part.
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
And the place death, considering who thou art,
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!
1My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
I am hurt.
What, art thou hurt?
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
!And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
AOur wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
That I will show you shining at this feast,
I am the greatest, able to do least,
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
Of a despised life closed in my breast
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
I thought all for the best.
Away, begone; the sport is at the best.
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
That calls our person from our morning's rest?
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
I'll to my rest.
!It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
they list.
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
Spare not for the cost.
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
ADeath lies on her like an untimely frost
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
There's no trust,
Out--
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
AGo, sirrah, trudge about
ABeshrew your heart for sending me about,
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
[Aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
She could have run and waddled all about;
ATush, I will stir about,
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
ears ere it be out.
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
That's a certain text.
I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Out upon you! what a man are you!
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
AAnd trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
!To answer that, I should confess to you.
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
I am for you.
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
And presently took post to tell it you:
I will follow you.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
you.
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
Unto the rigour of severest law.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
JULIET appears above at a window
Enter ROMEO and JULIET above, at the window
ABy holy marriage: when and where and how
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Despised substance of divinest show!
something; make it a word and a blow.
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
1Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
!Am I like such a fellow?
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.
Now, fellow,
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
But I will watch you from such watching now.
[Within] Let me come in, and you shall know
!We would as willingly give cure as know.
A rhyme I learn'd even now
'An if a man did need a poison now,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
!Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
!Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
AAnd yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.
Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
At what o'clock to-morrow
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
sweet sorrow,
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
O lamentable day!
O lamentable day!
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
O woful day, O woful day!
O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day,
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
!Look, look! O heavy day!
I mean, sir, in delay
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
AAnd all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
!Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
1Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Make haste, I say.
[Aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side, if I say
O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Faith, I know not what to say.
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
I dare no longer stay.
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Why dost thou stay?
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
!If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
Alla stoccata carries it away.
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
!Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
1For this time, all the rest depart away:
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
'Tis the way
[Within] Lead, boy: which way?
Hie you to church; I must another way,
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
ay?
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
That we may call it early by and by.
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
What shall I swear by?
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Ay, boy, ready.
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
1I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
'lady, lady, lady.'
Commend me to thy lady.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
Evermore showering? In one little body
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
QI charge thee in the princes name, obey.
You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
Or shall we on without a apology?
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
I will then give it you soundly.
wisely, wisely.
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
1And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
AIs she not down so late, or up so early?
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
That I must love a loathed enemy.
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
The only son of your great enemy.
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
In what vile part of this anatomy
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Is my dear son with such sour company:
I promise you, but for your company,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
Remembering how I love thy company.
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
AFrom ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
No truly sir; not a penny.
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
Enter Apothecary
Apothecary
Apothecary
Apothecary
Apothecary
O true apothecary!
I do remember an apothecary,--
What, ho! apothecary!
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
And all things change them to the contrary.
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Here were the servants of your adversary,
We cannot without circumstance descry.
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
So far from sounding and discovery,
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
But, O, it presses to my memory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
1But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
Rest you merry!
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!
Which is the god of my idolatry,
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
Meaning, to court'sy.
May be put from her by society:
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
But Romeo may not: more validity,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
And I am proof against their enmity.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
Two households, both alike in dignity,
To murder, murder our solemnity?
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
I will omit no opportunity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
For beauty starved with her severity
The date is out of such prolixity:
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
I think it best you married with the county.
On Thursday next be married to this county.
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
His son is thirty.
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Farewell, my coz.
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz












































































































































































ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz

ACT I
PROLOGUE
Two households, both alike in dignity,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Do with their death bury their parents' strife.
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
The which if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
SCENE I. Verona. A public place.
Enter SAMPSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, armed with swords and bucklers
SAMPSON
Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.
GREGORY
No, for then we should be colliers.
SAMPSON
I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
GREGORY
Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.
SAMPSON
I strike quickly, being moved.
GREGORY
But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
SAMPSON
A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
GREGORY
To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:
therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
SAMPSON
A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will
take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
GREGORY
That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes
to the wall.
SAMPSON
True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,
are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push
Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids
to the wall.
GREGORY
The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
SAMPSON
'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I
have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the
maids, and cut off their heads.
GREGORY
The heads of the maids?
SAMPSON
Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;
take it in what sense thou wilt.
GREGORY
They must take it in sense that feel it.
SAMPSON
Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and
'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
GREGORY
'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes
two of the house of the Montagues.
SAMPSON
My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.
GREGORY
How! turn thy back and run?
SAMPSON
Fear me not.
GREGORY
No, marry; I fear thee!
SAMPSON
Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
GREGORY
I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as
they list.
SAMPSON
Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them;
which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.
Enter ABRAHAM and BALTHASAR

ABRAHAM
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
SAMPSON
I do bite my thumb, sir.
ABRAHAM
Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
SAMPSON
[Aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side, if I say
ay?
GREGORY
No.
SAMPSON
No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I
bite my thumb, sir.
GREGORY
Do you quarrel, sir?
ABRAHAM
Quarrel sir! no, sir.
SAMPSON
If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.
ABRAHAM
No better.
SAMPSON
Well, sir.
GREGORY
Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
SAMPSON
Yes, better, sir.
ABRAHAM
You lie.
SAMPSON
Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
They fight

Enter BENVOLIO

BENVOLIO
Part, fools!
Put up your swords; you know not what you do.
Beats down their swords

Enter TYBALT

TYBALT
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.
BENVOLIO
I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.
TYBALT
What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:
Have at thee, coward!
They fight

Enter, several of both houses, who join the fray; then enter Citizens, with clubs

First Citizen
Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!
Enter CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET

CAPULET
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
LADY CAPULET
A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
CAPULET
My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Enter MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE

MONTAGUE
Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go.
LADY MONTAGUE
Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe.
Enter PRINCE, with Attendants

PRINCE
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time, all the rest depart away:
You Capulet; shall go along with me:
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
To know our further pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE, and BENVOLIO

MONTAGUE
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
BENVOLIO
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:
I drew to part them: in the instant came
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the prince came, who parted either part.
LADY MONTAGUE
O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
BENVOLIO
Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
So early walking did I see your son:
Towards him I made, but he was ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood:
I, measuring his affections by my own,
That most are busied when they're most alone,
Pursued my humour not pursuing his,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
MONTAGUE
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the furthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Away from the light steals home my heavy son,
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out
And makes himself an artificial night:
Black and portentous must this humour prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
BENVOLIO
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
MONTAGUE
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
BENVOLIO
Have you importuned him by any means?
MONTAGUE
Both by myself and many other friends:
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
Is to himself--I will not say how true--
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
We would as willingly give cure as know.
Enter ROMEO

BENVOLIO
See, where he comes: so please you, step aside;
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
MONTAGUE
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE

BENVOLIO
Good-morrow, cousin.
ROMEO
Is the day so young?
BENVOLIO
But new struck nine.
ROMEO
Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
BENVOLIO
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
ROMEO
Not having that, which, having, makes them short.
BENVOLIO
In love?
ROMEO
Out--
BENVOLIO
Of love?
ROMEO
Out of her favour, where I am in love.
BENVOLIO
Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
ROMEO
Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
O any thing, of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,
sick health!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?
BENVOLIO
No, coz, I rather weep.
ROMEO
Good heart, at what?
BENVOLIO
At thy good heart's oppression.
ROMEO
Why, such is love's transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:
What is it else? a madness most discreet,
A choking gall and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.
BENVOLIO
Soft! I will go along;
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
ROMEO
Tut, I have lost myself; I am not here;
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
BENVOLIO
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
ROMEO
What, shall I groan and tell thee?
BENVOLIO
Groan! why, no.
But sadly tell me who.
ROMEO
Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:
Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
BENVOLIO
I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved.
ROMEO
A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love.
BENVOLIO
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
ROMEO
Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit
With Cupid's arrow; she hath Dian's wit;
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,
That when she dies with beauty dies her store.
BENVOLIO
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
ROMEO
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,
For beauty starved with her severity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair:
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
BENVOLIO
Be ruled by me, forget to think of her.
ROMEO
O, teach me how I should forget to think.
BENVOLIO
By giving liberty unto thine eyes;
Examine other beauties.
ROMEO
'Tis the way
To call hers exquisite, in question more:
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows
Being black put us in mind they hide the fair;
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
What doth her beauty serve, but as a note
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.
BENVOLIO
I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
Exeunt

SCENE II. A street.
Enter CAPULET, PARIS, and Servant
CAPULET
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
PARIS
Of honourable reckoning are you both;
And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
CAPULET
But saying o'er what I have said before:
My child is yet a stranger in the world;
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,
Let two more summers wither in their pride,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
PARIS
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
CAPULET
And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth:
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,
My will to her consent is but a part;
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Such as I love; and you, among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-apparell'd April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house; hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be:
Which on more view, of many mine being one
May stand in number, though in reckoning none,
Come, go with me.
To Servant, giving a paper

Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS

Servant
Find them out whose names are written here! It is
written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his
yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with
his pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I am
sent to find those persons whose names are here
writ, and can never find what names the writing
person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time.
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO

BENVOLIO
Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,
One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish:
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
ROMEO
Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that.
BENVOLIO
For what, I pray thee?
ROMEO
For your broken shin.
BENVOLIO
Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
ROMEO
Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is;
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.
Servant
God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
ROMEO
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Servant
Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I
pray, can you read any thing you see?
ROMEO
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
Servant
Ye say honestly: rest you merry!
ROMEO
Stay, fellow; I can read.
Reads

'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady
widow of Vitravio; Signior Placentio and his lovely
nieces; Mercutio and his brother Valentine; mine
uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters; my fair niece
Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio and his cousin
Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair
assembly: whither should they come?
Servant
Up.
ROMEO
Whither?
Servant
To supper; to our house.
ROMEO
Whose house?
Servant
My master's.
ROMEO
Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before.
Servant
Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the
great rich Capulet; and if you be not of the house
of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.
Rest you merry!
Exit

BENVOLIO
At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,
With all the admired beauties of Verona:
Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
ROMEO
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
And these, who often drown'd could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
BENVOLIO
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye:
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Your lady's love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
ROMEO
I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
Exeunt

SCENE III. A room in Capulet's house.
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
LADY CAPULET
Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.
Nurse
Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Enter JULIET

JULIET
How now! who calls?
Nurse
Your mother.
JULIET
Madam, I am here.
What is your will?
LADY CAPULET
This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,
We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again;
I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.
Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
Nurse
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
LADY CAPULET
She's not fourteen.
Nurse
I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--
And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
To Lammas-tide?
LADY CAPULET
A fortnight and odd days.
Nurse
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--
Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me: but, as I said,
On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--
Of all the days of the year, upon that day:
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;
My lord and you were then at Mantua:--
Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,
To bid me trudge:
And since that time it is eleven years;
For then she could stand alone; nay, by the rood,
She could have run and waddled all about;
For even the day before, she broke her brow:
And then my husband--God be with his soul!
A' was a merry man--took up the child:
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,
The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'
To see, now, how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'
LADY CAPULET
Enough of this; I pray thee, hold thy peace.
Nurse
Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;
A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly:
'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'
JULIET
And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Nurse
Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.
LADY CAPULET
Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?
JULIET
It is an honour that I dream not of.
Nurse
An honour! were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
LADY CAPULET
Well, think of marriage now; younger than you,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers: by my count,
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Nurse
A man, young lady! lady, such a man
As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.
LADY CAPULET
Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Nurse
Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a very flower.
LADY CAPULET
What say you? can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast;
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Examine every married lineament,
And see how one another lends content
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him, only lacks a cover:
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide:
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
By having him, making yourself no less.
Nurse
No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men.
LADY CAPULET
Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
JULIET
I'll look to like, if looking liking move:
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Enter a Servant

Servant
Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you
called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in
the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must
hence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.
LADY CAPULET
We follow thee.
Exit Servant

Juliet, the county stays.
Nurse
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Exeunt

SCENE IV. A street.
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, with five or six Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others
ROMEO
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without a apology?
BENVOLIO
The date is out of such prolixity:
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance:
But let them measure us by what they will;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
ROMEO
Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling;
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
MERCUTIO
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
ROMEO
Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes
With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
MERCUTIO
You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,
And soar with them above a common bound.
ROMEO
I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:
Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
MERCUTIO
And, to sink in it, should you burden love;
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
ROMEO
Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,
Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
MERCUTIO
If love be rough with you, be rough with love;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Give me a case to put my visage in:
A visor for a visor! what care I
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
BENVOLIO
Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in,
But every man betake him to his legs.
ROMEO
A torch for me: let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase;
I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
MERCUTIO
Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:
If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
ROMEO
Nay, that's not so.
MERCUTIO
I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
ROMEO
And we mean well in going to this mask;
But 'tis no wit to go.
MERCUTIO
Why, may one ask?
ROMEO
I dream'd a dream to-night.
MERCUTIO
And so did I.
ROMEO
Well, what was yours?
MERCUTIO
That dreamers often lie.
ROMEO
In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
MERCUTIO
O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
The traces of the smallest spider's web,
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,
O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,
Then dreams, he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night,
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she--
ROMEO
Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.
MERCUTIO
True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
BENVOLIO
This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves;
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
ROMEO
I fear, too early: for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night's revels and expire the term
Of a despised life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But He, that hath the steerage of my course,
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.
BENVOLIO
Strike, drum.
Exeunt

SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house.
Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins
First Servant
Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He
shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!
Second Servant
When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's
hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
First Servant
Away with the joint-stools, remove the
court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save
me a piece of marchpane; and, as thou lovest me, let
the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
Antony, and Potpan!
Second Servant
Ay, boy, ready.
First Servant
You are looked for and called for, asked for and
sought for, in the great chamber.
Second Servant
We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys; be
brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house, meeting the Guests and Maskers

CAPULET
Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,
She, I'll swear, hath corns; am I come near ye now?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:
You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play.
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
Music plays, and they dance

More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;
For you and I are past our dancing days:
How long is't now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?
Second Capulet
By'r lady, thirty years.
CAPULET
What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:
'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,
Come pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years; and then we mask'd.
Second Capulet
'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir;
His son is thirty.
CAPULET
Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.
ROMEO
[To a Servingman] What lady is that, which doth
enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?
Servant
I know not, sir.
ROMEO
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear;
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
TYBALT
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.
CAPULET
Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?
TYBALT
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite,
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
CAPULET
Young Romeo is it?
TYBALT
'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
CAPULET
Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone;
He bears him like a portly gentleman;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:
I would not for the wealth of all the town
Here in my house do him disparagement:
Therefore be patient, take no note of him:
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
TYBALT
It fits, when such a villain is a guest:
I'll not endure him.
CAPULET
He shall be endured:
What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to;
Am I the master here, or you? go to.
You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
TYBALT
Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
CAPULET
Go to, go to;
You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:
You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.
Well said, my hearts! You are a princox; go:
Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!
I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!
TYBALT
Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall
Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.
Exit

ROMEO
[To JULIET] If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
JULIET
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
ROMEO
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
JULIET
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
ROMEO
O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;
They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
JULIET
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
ROMEO
Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take.
Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged.
JULIET
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
ROMEO
Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.
JULIET
You kiss by the book.
Nurse
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
ROMEO
What is her mother?
Nurse
Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous
I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal;
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.
ROMEO
Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
BENVOLIO
Away, begone; the sport is at the best.
ROMEO
Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
CAPULET
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all
I thank you, honest gentlemen; good night.
More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:
I'll to my rest.
Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse

JULIET
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Nurse
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
JULIET
What's he that now is going out of door?
Nurse
Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.
JULIET
What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Nurse
I know not.
JULIET
Go ask his name: if he be married.
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Nurse
His name is Romeo, and a Montague;
The only son of your great enemy.
JULIET
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me,
That I must love a loathed enemy.
Nurse
What's this? what's this?
JULIET
A rhyme I learn'd even now
Of one I danced withal.
One calls within 'Juliet.'

Nurse
Anon, anon!
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Exeunt

ACT II
PROLOGUE
Enter Chorus
Chorus
Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear;
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new-beloved any where:
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet
Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
Exit

SCENE I. A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard.
Enter ROMEO
ROMEO
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it

Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO

BENVOLIO
Romeo! my cousin Romeo!
MERCUTIO
He is wise;
And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.
BENVOLIO
He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:
Call, good Mercutio.
MERCUTIO
Nay, I'll conjure too.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove;'
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,
When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
BENVOLIO
And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
MERCUTIO
This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down;
That were some spite: my invocation
Is fair and honest, and in his mistres s' name
I conjure only but to raise up him.
BENVOLIO
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,
To be consorted with the humorous night:
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
MERCUTIO
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.
Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!
Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:
Come, shall we go?
BENVOLIO
Go, then; for 'tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
Exeunt

SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
Enter ROMEO
ROMEO
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
JULIET appears above at a window

But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she:
Be not her maid, since she is envious;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green
And none but fools do wear it; cast it off.
It is my lady, O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!
JULIET
Ay me!
ROMEO
She speaks:
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
JULIET
O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
ROMEO
[Aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
JULIET
'Tis but thy name that is my enemy;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
What's in a name? that which we call a rose
By any other name would smell as sweet;
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And for that name which is no part of thee
Take all myself.
ROMEO
I take thee at thy word:
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized;
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
JULIET
What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night
So stumblest on my counsel?
ROMEO
By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am:
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Because it is an enemy to thee;
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
JULIET
My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:
Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?
ROMEO
Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
JULIET
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
ROMEO
With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls;
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do that dares love attempt;
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
JULIET
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
ROMEO
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
JULIET
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
ROMEO
I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
And but thou love me, let them find me here:
My life were better ended by their hate,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
JULIET
By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
ROMEO
By love, who first did prompt me to inquire;
He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
I would adventure for such merchandise.
JULIET
Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night
Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny
What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'
And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,
Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries
Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:
Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,
I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
ROMEO
Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--
JULIET
O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
ROMEO
What shall I swear by?
JULIET
Do not swear at all;
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I'll believe thee.
ROMEO
If my heart's dear love--
JULIET
Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract to-night:
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden;
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
ROMEO
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
JULIET
What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
ROMEO
The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
JULIET
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:
And yet I would it were to give again.
ROMEO
Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
JULIET
But to be frank, and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have:
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
Nurse calls within

I hear some noise within; dear love, adieu!
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little, I will come again.
Exit, above

ROMEO
O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard.
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Re-enter JULIET, above

JULIET
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
Nurse
[Within] Madam!
JULIET
I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,
I do beseech thee--
Nurse
[Within] Madam!
JULIET
By and by, I come:--
To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:
To-morrow will I send.
ROMEO
So thrive my soul--
JULIET
A thousand times good night!
Exit, above

ROMEO
A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.
Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from
their books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Retiring

Re-enter JULIET, above

JULIET
Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud;
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
ROMEO
It is my soul that calls upon my name:
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears!
JULIET
Romeo!
ROMEO
My dear?
JULIET
At what o'clock to-morrow
Shall I send to thee?
ROMEO
At the hour of nine.
JULIET
I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
ROMEO
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
JULIET
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Remembering how I love thy company.
ROMEO
And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
JULIET
'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:
And yet no further than a wanton's bird;
Who lets it hop a little from her hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
ROMEO
I would I were thy bird.
JULIET
Sweet, so would I:
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night! parting is such
sweet sorrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Exit above

ROMEO
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
Exit

SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE, with a basket
FRIAR LAURENCE
The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave that is her womb,
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:
For nought so vile that on the earth doth live
But to the earth some special good doth give,
Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;
And vice sometimes by action dignified.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Enter ROMEO

ROMEO
Good morrow, father.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Benedicite!
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distemper'd head
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
And where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art up-roused by some distemperature;
Or if not so, then here I hit it right,
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
ROMEO
That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
FRIAR LAURENCE
God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?
ROMEO
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
FRIAR LAURENCE
That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?
ROMEO
I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,
That's by me wounded: both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies:
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
ROMEO
Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage: when and where and how
We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:
If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:
And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,
Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
ROMEO
Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
FRIAR LAURENCE
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
ROMEO
And bad'st me bury love.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Not in a grave,
To lay one in, another out to have.
ROMEO
I pray thee, chide not; she whom I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow;
The other did not so.
FRIAR LAURENCE
O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me,
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
For this alliance may so happy prove,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
ROMEO
O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.
Exeunt

SCENE IV. A street.
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO
MERCUTIO
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home to-night?
BENVOLIO
Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.
MERCUTIO
Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.
Torments him so, that he will sure run mad.
BENVOLIO
Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
MERCUTIO
A challenge, on my life.
BENVOLIO
Romeo will answer it.
MERCUTIO
Any man that can write may answer a letter.
BENVOLIO
Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he
dares, being dared.
MERCUTIO
Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead; stabbed with a
white wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a
love-song; the very pin of his heart cleft with the
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to
encounter Tybalt?
BENVOLIO
Why, what is Tybalt?
MERCUTIO
More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is
the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as
you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and
proportion; rests me his minim rest, one, two, and
the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk
button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman of the
very first house, of the first and second cause:
ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the
hai!
BENVOLIO
The what?
MERCUTIO
The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
fantasticoes; these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,
a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good
whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with
these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these
perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,
that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their
bones, their bones!
Enter ROMEO

BENVOLIO
Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
MERCUTIO
Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,
how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers
that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a
kitchen-wench; marry, she had a better love to
be-rhyme her; Dido a dowdy; Cleopatra a gipsy;
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots; Thisbe a grey
eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior
Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation
to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
fairly last night.
ROMEO
Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
MERCUTIO
The ship, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
ROMEO
Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in
such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
MERCUTIO
That's as much as to say, such a case as yours
constrains a man to bow in the hams.
ROMEO
Meaning, to court'sy.
MERCUTIO
Thou hast most kindly hit it.
ROMEO
A most courteous exposition.
MERCUTIO
Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
ROMEO
Pink for flower.
MERCUTIO
Right.
ROMEO
Why, then is my pump well flowered.
MERCUTIO
Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast
worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it
is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.
ROMEO
O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.
MERCUTIO
Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.
ROMEO
Switch and spurs, switch and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
MERCUTIO
Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have
done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of
thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:
was I with you there for the goose?
ROMEO
Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast
not there for the goose.
MERCUTIO
I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
ROMEO
Nay, good goose, bite not.
MERCUTIO
Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.
ROMEO
And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?
MERCUTIO
O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an
inch narrow to an ell broad!
ROMEO
I stretch it out for that word 'broad;' which added
to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
MERCUTIO
Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?
now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art
thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:
for this drivelling love is like a great natural,
that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
BENVOLIO
Stop there, stop there.
MERCUTIO
Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
BENVOLIO
Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
MERCUTIO
O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short:
for I was come to the whole depth of my tale; and
meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
ROMEO
Here's goodly gear!
Enter Nurse and PETER

MERCUTIO
A sail, a sail!
BENVOLIO
Two, two; a shirt and a smock.
Nurse
Peter!
PETER
Anon!
Nurse
My fan, Peter.
MERCUTIO
Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the
fairer face.
Nurse
God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
MERCUTIO
God ye good den, fair gentlewoman.
Nurse
Is it good den?
MERCUTIO
'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the
dial is now upon the prick of noon.
Nurse
Out upon you! what a man are you!
ROMEO
One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to
mar.
Nurse
By my troth, it is well said; 'for himself to mar,'
quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I
may find the young Romeo?
ROMEO
I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when
you have found him than he was when you sought him:
I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
Nurse
You say well.
MERCUTIO
Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith;
wisely, wisely.
Nurse
if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.
BENVOLIO
She will indite him to some supper.
MERCUTIO
A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!
ROMEO
What hast thou found?
MERCUTIO
No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,
that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
Sings

An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
Is very good meat in lent
But a hare that is hoar
Is too much for a score,
When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll
to dinner, thither.
ROMEO
I will follow you.
MERCUTIO
Farewell, ancient lady; farewell,
Singing

'lady, lady, lady.'
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO

Nurse
Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy
merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?
ROMEO
A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,
and will speak more in a minute than he will stand
to in a month.
Nurse
An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him
down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such
Jacks; and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills; I am
none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by
too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
PETER
I saw no man use you a pleasure; if I had, my weapon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare
draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a
good quarrel, and the law on my side.
Nurse
Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about
me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:
and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you
out; what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:
but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into
a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross
kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman
is young; and, therefore, if you should deal double
with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered
to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
ROMEO
Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I
protest unto thee--
Nurse
Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
ROMEO
What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
Nurse
I will tell her, sir, that you do protest; which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
ROMEO
Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Nurse
No truly sir; not a penny.
ROMEO
Go to; I say you shall.
Nurse
This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
ROMEO
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;
Which to the high top-gallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:
Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
Nurse
Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
ROMEO
What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Nurse
Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
ROMEO
I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
NURSE
Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,
Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there
is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain
lay knife aboard; but she, good soul, had as lief
see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her
sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer
man; but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks
as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not
rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?
ROMEO
Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.
Nurse
Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name; R is for
the--No; I know it begins with some other
letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of
it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
to hear it.
ROMEO
Commend me to thy lady.
Nurse
Ay, a thousand times.
Exit Romeo

Peter!
PETER
Anon!
Nurse
Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace.
Exeunt

SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
Enter JULIET
JULIET
The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so.
O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills:
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me:
But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
O God, she comes!
Enter Nurse and PETER

O honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Nurse
Peter, stay at the gate.
Exit PETER

JULIET
Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Nurse
I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:
Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!
JULIET
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak; good, good nurse, speak.
Nurse
Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
JULIET
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Nurse
Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not
how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he; though his
face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels
all men's; and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,
though they be not to be talked on, yet they are
past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,
but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench; serve God. What, have you dined at home?
JULIET
No, no: but all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? what of that?
Nurse
Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about,
To catch my death with jaunting up and down!
JULIET
I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Nurse
Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?
JULIET
Where is my mother! why, she is within;
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?'
Nurse
O God's lady dear!
Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow;
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
JULIET
Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?
Nurse
Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
JULIET
I have.
Nurse
Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
There stays a husband to make you a wife:
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go; I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell.
JULIET
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Exeunt

SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and ROMEO
FRIAR LAURENCE
So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
That after hours with sorrow chide us not!
ROMEO
Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight:
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare;
It is enough I may but call her mine.
FRIAR LAURENCE
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite:
Therefore love moderately; long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Enter JULIET

Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:
A lover may bestride the gossamer
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
JULIET
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
JULIET
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
ROMEO
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
JULIET
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament:
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till holy church incorporate two in one.
Exeunt

ACT III
SCENE I. A public place.
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, and Servants
BENVOLIO
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,
And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
MERCUTIO
Thou art like one of those fellows that when he
enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword
upon the table and says 'God send me no need of
thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws
it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
BENVOLIO
Am I like such a fellow?
MERCUTIO
Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as
any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as
soon moody to be moved.
BENVOLIO
And what to?
MERCUTIO
Nay, an there were two such, we should have none
shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,
thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,
or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou
wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no
other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what
eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?
Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of
meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as
an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a
man for coughing in the street, because he hath
wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:
didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing
his new doublet before Easter? with another, for
tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou
wilt tutor me from quarrelling!
BENVOLIO
An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man
should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
MERCUTIO
The fee-simple! O simple!
BENVOLIO
By my head, here come the Capulets.
MERCUTIO
By my heel, I care not.
Enter TYBALT and others

TYBALT
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you.
MERCUTIO
And but one word with one of us? couple it with
something; make it a word and a blow.
TYBALT
You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you
will give me occasion.
MERCUTIO
Could you not take some occasion without giving?
TYBALT
Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--
MERCUTIO
Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an
thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but
discords: here's my fiddlestick; here's that shall
make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!
BENVOLIO
We talk here in the public haunt of men:
Either withdraw unto some private place,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.
MERCUTIO
Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Enter ROMEO

TYBALT
Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man.
MERCUTIO
But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'
TYBALT
Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford
No better term than this,--thou art a villain.
ROMEO
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting: villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.
TYBALT
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
ROMEO
I do protest, I never injured thee,
But love thee better than thou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
As dearly as my own,--be satisfied.
MERCUTIO
O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries it away.
Draws

Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
TYBALT
What wouldst thou have with me?
MERCUTIO
Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine
lives; that I mean to make bold withal, and as you
shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher
by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.
TYBALT
I am for you.
Drawing

ROMEO
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
MERCUTIO
Come, sir, your passado.
They fight

ROMEO
Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:
Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!
TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies with his followers

MERCUTIO
I am hurt.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Is he gone, and hath nothing?
BENVOLIO
What, art thou hurt?
MERCUTIO
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Exit Page

ROMEO
Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.
MERCUTIO
No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a
church-door; but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for
me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'
both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a
rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of
arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I
was hurt under your arm.
ROMEO
I thought all for the best.
MERCUTIO
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,
And soundly too: your houses!
Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO

ROMEO
This gentleman, the prince's near ally,
My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt
In my behalf; my reputation stain'd
With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!
Re-enter BENVOLIO

BENVOLIO
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
ROMEO
This day's black fate on more days doth depend;
This but begins the woe, others must end.
BENVOLIO
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
ROMEO
Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Re-enter TYBALT

Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company:
Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him.
TYBALT
Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.
ROMEO
This shall determine that.
They fight; TYBALT falls

BENVOLIO
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,
If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!
ROMEO
O, I am fortune's fool!
BENVOLIO
Why dost thou stay?
Exit ROMEO

Enter Citizens, & c

First Citizen
Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
BENVOLIO
There lies that Tybalt.
First Citizen
Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in the princes name, obey.
Enter Prince, attended; MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their Wives, and others

PRINCE
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
BENVOLIO
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
LADY CAPULET
Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt
O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!
PRINCE
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
BENVOLIO
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;
Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure: all this uttered
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,
Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside, and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,
Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than
his tongue,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
LADY CAPULET
He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true:
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
PRINCE
Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio;
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
MONTAGUE
Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
PRINCE
And for that offence
Immediately we do exile him hence:
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine:
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he's found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will:
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Exeunt

SCENE II. Capulet's orchard.
Enter JULIET
JULIET
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner
As Phaethon would whip you to the west,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.
Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Enter Nurse, with cords

Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Nurse
Ay, ay, the cords.
Throws them down

JULIET
Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
Nurse
Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
JULIET
Can heaven be so envious?
Nurse
Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
JULIET
What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:
I am not I, if there be such an I;
Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'
If he be slain, say 'I'; or if not, no:
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Nurse
I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--
God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood; I swounded at the sight.
JULIET
O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
Nurse
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
JULIET
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?
My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Nurse
Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
JULIET
O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Nurse
It did, it did; alas the day, it did!
JULIET
O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!
Nurse
There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!
JULIET
Blister'd be thy tongue
For such a wish! he was not born to shame:
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Nurse
Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
JULIET
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;
But, O, it presses to my memory,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished;'
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Was woe enough, if it had ended there:
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Which modern lamentations might have moved?
But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,
'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?
Nurse
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
JULIET
Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeo is exiled:
He made you for a highway to my bed;
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Nurse
Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo
To comfort you: I wot well where he is.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
JULIET
O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Exeunt

SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE
FRIAR LAURENCE
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man:
Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Enter ROMEO

ROMEO
Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?
FRIAR LAURENCE
Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company:
I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
ROMEO
What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?
FRIAR LAURENCE
A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
ROMEO
Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death;'
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'
FRIAR LAURENCE
Hence from Verona art thou banished:
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
ROMEO
There is no world without Verona walls,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,
And world's exile is death: then banished,
Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,
Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
FRIAR LAURENCE
O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
And turn'd that black word death to banishment:
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
ROMEO
'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
But Romeo may not: more validity,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty,
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banished:
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:
They are free men, but I am banished.
And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
FRIAR LAURENCE
Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word.
ROMEO
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
FRIAR LAURENCE
I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
ROMEO
Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.
FRIAR LAURENCE
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
ROMEO
How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
FRIAR LAURENCE
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
ROMEO
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me and like me banished,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Knocking within

FRIAR LAURENCE
Arise; one knocks; good Romeo, hide thyself.
ROMEO
Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.
Knocking

FRIAR LAURENCE
Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up;
Knocking

Run to my study. By and by! God's will,
What simpleness is this! I come, I come!
Knocking

Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
Nurse
[Within] Let me come in, and you shall know
my errand;
I come from Lady Juliet.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Welcome, then.
Enter Nurse

Nurse
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
FRIAR LAURENCE
There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Nurse
O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case! O woful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand, and you be a man:
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
ROMEO
Nurse!
Nurse
Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
ROMEO
Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?
Doth she not think me an old murderer,
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? and how doth she? and what says
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Nurse
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
ROMEO
As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her; as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.
Drawing his sword

FRIAR LAURENCE
Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast:
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?
And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit;
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.
What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;
There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt; there are thou happy too:
The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:
A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:
Romeo is coming.
Nurse
O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
ROMEO
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Nurse
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Exit

ROMEO
How well my comfort is revived by this!
FRIAR LAURENCE
Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Or by the break of day disguised from hence:
Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here:
Give me thy hand; 'tis late: farewell; good night.
ROMEO
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.
Exeunt

SCENE IV. A room in Capulet's house.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS
CAPULET
Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,
That we have had no time to move our daughter:
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.
'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been a-bed an hour ago.
PARIS
These times of woe afford no time to woo.
Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.
LADY CAPULET
I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.
CAPULET
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me; nay, more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;
And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--
But, soft! what day is this?
PARIS
Monday, my lord,
CAPULET
Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,
O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Will you be ready? do you like this haste?
We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two;
For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much:
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
PARIS
My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
CAPULET
Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.
Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me! it is so very very late,
That we may call it early by and by.
Good night.
Exeunt

SCENE V. Capulet's orchard.
Enter ROMEO and JULIET above, at the window
JULIET
Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
ROMEO
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
JULIET
Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:
It is some meteor that the sun exhales,
To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,
And light thee on thy way to Mantua:
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
ROMEO
Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:
I have more care to stay than will to go:
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? let's talk; it is not day.
JULIET
It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
This doth not so, for she divideth us:
Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,
O, now I would they had changed voices too!
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,
O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.
ROMEO
More light and light; more dark and dark our woes!
Enter Nurse, to the chamber

Nurse
Madam!
JULIET
Nurse?
Nurse
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:
The day is broke; be wary, look about.
Exit

JULIET
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
ROMEO
Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.
He goeth down

JULIET
Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days:
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
ROMEO
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
JULIET
O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
ROMEO
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
JULIET
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
ROMEO
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Exit

JULIET
O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;
For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.
LADY CAPULET
[Within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
JULIET
Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Enter LADY CAPULET

LADY CAPULET
Why, how now, Juliet!
JULIET
Madam, I am not well.
LADY CAPULET
Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;
Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
JULIET
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
LADY CAPULET
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.
JULIET
Feeling so the loss,
Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
LADY CAPULET
Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
JULIET
What villain madam?
LADY CAPULET
That same villain, Romeo.
JULIET
[Aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.--
God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
LADY CAPULET
That is, because the traitor murderer lives.
JULIET
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
LADY CAPULET
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
JULIET
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--
Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it;
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named, and cannot come to him.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that slaughter'd him!
LADY CAPULET
Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
JULIET
And joy comes well in such a needy time:
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
LADY CAPULET
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,
That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for.
JULIET
Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
LADY CAPULET
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,
The gallant, young and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
JULIET
Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste; that I must wed
Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and, when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
LADY CAPULET
Here comes your father; tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.
Enter CAPULET and Nurse

CAPULET
When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of my brother's son
It rains downright.
How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?
Evermore showering? In one little body
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind;
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;
Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!
Have you deliver'd to her our decree?
LADY CAPULET
Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
CAPULET
Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
JULIET
Not proud, you have; but thankful, that you have:
Proud can I never be of what I hate;
But thankful even for hate, that is meant love.
CAPULET
How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?
'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not;'
And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,
Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!
LADY CAPULET
Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
JULIET
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
CAPULET
Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face:
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
That God had lent us but this only child;
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her:
Out on her, hilding!
Nurse
God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
CAPULET
And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.
Nurse
I speak no treason.
CAPULET
O, God ye god-den.
Nurse
May not one speak?
CAPULET
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl;
For here we need it not.
LADY CAPULET
You are too hot.
CAPULET
God's bread! it makes me mad:
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her match'd: and having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man;
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
To answer 'I'll not wed; I cannot love,
I am too young; I pray you, pardon me.'
But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:
Graze where you will you shall not house with me:
Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in
the streets,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:
Trust to't, bethink you; I'll not be forsworn.
Exit

JULIET
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
LADY CAPULET
Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
Exit

JULIET
O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;
How shall that faith return again to earth,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.
Nurse
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing,
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the county.
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first: or if it did not,
Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,
As living here and you no use of him.
JULIET
Speakest thou from thy heart?
Nurse
And from my soul too;
Or else beshrew them both.
JULIET
Amen!
Nurse
What?
JULIET
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,
To make confession and to be absolved.
Nurse
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
Exit

JULIET
Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
Exit

ACT IV
SCENE I. Friar Laurence's cell.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS
FRIAR LAURENCE
On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.
PARIS
My father Capulet will have it so;
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
FRIAR LAURENCE
You say you do not know the lady's mind:
Uneven is the course, I like it not.
PARIS
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,
To stop the inundation of her tears;
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society:
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
FRIAR LAURENCE
[Aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.
Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell.
Enter JULIET

PARIS
Happily met, my lady and my wife!
JULIET
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
PARIS
That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
JULIET
What must be shall be.
FRIAR LAURENCE
That's a certain text.
PARIS
Come you to make confession to this father?
JULIET
To answer that, I should confess to you.
PARIS
Do not deny to him that you love me.
JULIET
I will confess to you that I love him.
PARIS
So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
JULIET
If I do so, it will be of more price,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
PARIS
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
JULIET
The tears have got small victory by that;
For it was bad enough before their spite.
PARIS
Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.
JULIET
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
PARIS
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.
JULIET
It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now;
Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
FRIAR LAURENCE
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
PARIS
God shield I should disturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:
Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.
Exit

JULIET
O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!
FRIAR LAURENCE
Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
It strains me past the compass of my wits:
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this county.
JULIET
Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:
If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both:
Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Be not so long to speak; I long to die,
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That copest with death himself to scape from it:
And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy.
JULIET
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of yonder tower;
Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;
Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,
O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consent
To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:
To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,
Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:
And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come: and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame;
If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
JULIET
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
FRIAR LAURENCE
Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperous
In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
JULIET
Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!
Exeunt

SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, Nurse, and two Servingmen
CAPULET
So many guests invite as here are writ.
Exit First Servant

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Second Servant
You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they
can lick their fingers.
CAPULET
How canst thou try them so?
Second Servant
Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his
own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.
CAPULET
Go, be gone.
Exit Second Servant

We shall be much unfurnished for this time.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
Nurse
Ay, forsooth.
CAPULET
Well, he may chance to do some good on her:
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Nurse
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Enter JULIET

CAPULET
How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?
JULIET
Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,
And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
CAPULET
Send for the county; go tell him of this:
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
JULIET
I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.
CAPULET
Why, I am glad on't; this is well: stand up:
This is as't should be. Let me see the county;
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,
Our whole city is much bound to him.
JULIET
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
LADY CAPULET
No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.
CAPULET
Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.
Exeunt JULIET and Nurse

LADY CAPULET
We shall be short in our provision:
'Tis now near night.
CAPULET
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone;
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Exeunt

SCENE III. Juliet's chamber.
Enter JULIET and Nurse
JULIET
Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee, leave me to my self to-night,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin.
Enter LADY CAPULET

LADY CAPULET
What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?
JULIET
No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,
In this so sudden business.
LADY CAPULET
Good night:
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse

JULIET
Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up the heat of life:
I'll call them back again to comfort me:
Nurse! What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.
Laying down her dagger

What if it be a poison, which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!
Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like,
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place,--
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,
Where, for these many hundred years, the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed:
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort;--
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environed with all these hideous fears?
And madly play with my forefather's joints?
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
She falls upon her bed, within the curtains

SCENE IV. Hall in Capulet's house.
Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse
LADY CAPULET
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
Nurse
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Enter CAPULET

CAPULET
Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,
The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:
Spare not for the cost.
Nurse
Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed; faith, You'll be sick to-morrow
For this night's watching.
CAPULET
No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
LADY CAPULET
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse

CAPULET
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!
Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits, logs, and baskets

Now, fellow,
What's there?
First Servant
Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
CAPULET
Make haste, make haste.
Exit First Servant

Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
Second Servant
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Exit

CAPULET
Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:
The county will be here with music straight,
For so he said he would: I hear him near.
Music within

Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!
Re-enter Nurse

Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up;
I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:
Make haste, I say.
Exeunt

SCENE V. Juliet's chamber.
Enter Nurse
Nurse
Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!
What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now;
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest,
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,
Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!
I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the county take you in your bed;
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Undraws the curtains

What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!
I must needs wake you; Lady! lady! lady!
Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!
O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!
Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Enter LADY CAPULET

LADY CAPULET
What noise is here?
Nurse
O lamentable day!
LADY CAPULET
What is the matter?
Nurse
Look, look! O heavy day!
LADY CAPULET
O me, O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Help, help! Call help.
Enter CAPULET

CAPULET
For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Nurse
She's dead, deceased, she's dead; alack the day!
LADY CAPULET
Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
CAPULET
Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Life and these lips have long been separated:
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Nurse
O lamentable day!
LADY CAPULET
O woful time!
CAPULET
Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS, with Musicians

FRIAR LAURENCE
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
CAPULET
Ready to go, but never to return.
O son! the night before thy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,
And leave him all; life, living, all is Death's.
PARIS
Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
LADY CAPULET
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!
Nurse
O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day,
That ever, ever, I did yet behold!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this:
O woful day, O woful day!
PARIS
Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
CAPULET
Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead;
And with my child my joys are buried.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid:
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion;
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love, you love your child so ill,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well:
She's not well married that lives married long;
But she's best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse; and, as the custom is,
In all her best array bear her to church:
For though fond nature bids us an lament,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
CAPULET
All things that we ordained festival,
Turn from their office to black funeral;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris; every one prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave:
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Exeunt CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, PARIS, and FRIAR LAURENCE

First Musician
Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone.
Nurse
Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up;
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
Exit

First Musician
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Enter PETER

PETER
Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's
ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
First Musician
Why 'Heart's ease?'
PETER
O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My
heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,
to comfort me.
First Musician
Not a dump we; 'tis no time to play now.
PETER
You will not, then?
First Musician
No.
PETER
I will then give it you soundly.
First Musician
What will you give us?
PETER
No money, on my faith, but the gleek;
I will give you the minstrel.
First Musician
Then I will give you the serving-creature.
PETER
Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,
I'll fa you; do you note me?
First Musician
An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Second Musician
Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
PETER
Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you
with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer
me like men:
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Then music with her silver sound'--
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver
sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?
Musician
Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
PETER
Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
Second Musician
I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.
PETER
Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Third Musician
Faith, I know not what to say.
PETER
O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say
for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'
because musicians have no gold for sounding:
'Then music with her silver sound
With speedy help doth lend redress.'
Exit

First Musician
What a pestilent knave is this same!
Second Musician
Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here; tarry for the
mourners, and stay dinner.
Exeunt

ACT V
SCENE I. Mantua. A street.
Enter ROMEO
ROMEO
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--
Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave
to think!--
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,
That I revived, and was an emperor.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Enter BALTHASAR, booted

News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;
For nothing can be ill, if she be well.
BALTHASAR
Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,
And presently took post to tell it you:
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
ROMEO
Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!
Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses; I will hence to-night.
BALTHASAR
I do beseech you, sir, have patience:
Your looks are pale and wild, and do import
Some misadventure.
ROMEO
Tush, thou art deceived:
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
BALTHASAR
No, my good lord.
ROMEO
No matter: get thee gone,
And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
Exit BALTHASAR

Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
I do remember an apothecary,--
And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted
In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
'An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
O, this same thought did but forerun my need;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut.
What, ho! apothecary!
Enter Apothecary

Apothecary
Who calls so loud?
ROMEO
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:
Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins
That the life-weary taker may fall dead
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Apothecary
Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Is death to any he that utters them.
ROMEO
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back;
The world is not thy friend nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
Apothecary
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
ROMEO
I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
Apothecary
Put this in any liquid thing you will,
And drink it off; and, if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
ROMEO
There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,
Doing more murders in this loathsome world,
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
Exeunt

SCENE II. Friar Laurence's cell.
Enter FRIAR JOHN
FRIAR JOHN
Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE

FRIAR LAURENCE
This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
FRIAR JOHN
Going to find a bare-foot brother out
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
FRIAR JOHN
I could not send it,--here it is again,--
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence;
Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight
Unto my cell.
FRIAR JOHN
Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.
Exit

FRIAR LAURENCE
Now must I to the monument alone;
Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come;
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!
Exit

SCENE III. A churchyard; in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets.
Enter PARIS, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch
PARIS
Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,
Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,
But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
PAGE
[Aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
Retires

PARIS
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--
O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones;--
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
The Page whistles

The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
Retires

Enter ROMEO and BALTHASAR, with a torch, mattock, & c

ROMEO
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter; early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,
Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death,
Is partly to behold my lady's face;
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I further shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
BALTHASAR
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
ROMEO
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:
Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.
BALTHASAR
[Aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Retires

ROMEO
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
Opens the tomb

PARIS
This is that banish'd haughty Montague,
That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,
It is supposed, the fair creature died;
And here is come to do some villanous shame
To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him.
Comes forward

Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
ROMEO
I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;
Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone;
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head,
By urging me to fury: O, be gone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself;
For I come hither arm'd against myself:
Stay not, be gone; live, and hereafter say,
A madman's mercy bade thee run away.
PARIS
I do defy thy conjurations,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
ROMEO
Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
They fight

PAGE
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
Exit

PARIS
O, I am slain!
Falls

If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
Dies

ROMEO
In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man, when my betossed soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet:
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave;
A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Laying PARIS in the tomb

How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
A lightning before death: O, how may I
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:
Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favour can I do to thee,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that, I still will stay with thee;
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again: here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chamber-maids; O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest,
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!
Here's to my love!
Drinks

O true apothecary!
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
Dies

Enter, at the other end of the churchyard, FRIAR LAURENCE, with a lantern, crow, and spade

FRIAR LAURENCE
Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
BALTHASAR
Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,
It burneth in the Capel's monument.
BALTHASAR
It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
One that you love.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Who is it?
BALTHASAR
Romeo.
FRIAR LAURENCE
How long hath he been there?
BALTHASAR
Full half an hour.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Go with me to the vault.
BALTHASAR
I dare not, sir
My master knows not but I am gone hence;
And fearfully did menace me with death,
If I did stay to look on his intents.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Stay, then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:
O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
BALTHASAR
As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.
FRIAR LAURENCE
Romeo!
Advances

Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Enters the tomb

Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.
JULIET wakes

JULIET
O comfortable friar! where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Noise within

FRIAR LAURENCE
I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming;
Come, go, good Juliet,
Noise again

I dare no longer stay.
JULIET
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Exit FRIAR LAURENCE

What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips;
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make die with a restorative.
Kisses him

Thy lips are warm.
First Watchman
[Within] Lead, boy: which way?
JULIET
Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Snatching ROMEO's dagger

This is thy sheath;
Stabs herself

there rust, and let me die.
Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies

Enter Watch, with the Page of PARIS

PAGE
This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.
First Watchman
The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:
Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain these two days buried.
Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:
Raise up the Montagues: some others search:
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR

Second Watchman
Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.
First Watchman
Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither.
Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE

Third Watchman
Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:
We took this mattock and this spade from him,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
First Watchman
A great suspicion: stay the friar too.
Enter the PRINCE and Attendants

PRINCE
What misadventure is so early up,
That calls our person from our morning's rest?
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and others

CAPULET
What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
LADY CAPULET
The people in the street cry Romeo,
Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,
With open outcry toward our monument.
PRINCE
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
First Watchman
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new kill'd.
PRINCE
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
First Watchman
Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man;
With instruments upon them, fit to open
These dead men's tombs.
CAPULET
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,--
And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!
LADY CAPULET
O me! this sight of death is as a bell,
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Enter MONTAGUE and others

PRINCE
Come, Montague; for thou art early up,
To see thy son and heir more early down.
MONTAGUE
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:
What further woe conspires against mine age?
PRINCE
Look, and thou shalt see.
MONTAGUE  
O thou untaught! what manners is in this?
To press before thy father to a grave?
PRINCE
Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Till we can clear these ambiguities,
And know their spring, their head, their
true descent;
And then will I be general of your woes,
And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
FRIAR LAURENCE
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me of this direful murder;
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemned and myself excused.
PRINCE
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
FRIAR LAURENCE
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:
I married them; and their stol'n marriage-day
Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
To County Paris: then comes she to me,
And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,
A sleeping potion; which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,
That he should hither come as this dire night,
To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixed hour of her waking,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth,
And bear this work of heaven with patience:
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,
Unto the rigour of severest law.
PRINCE
We still have known thee for a holy man.
Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?
BALTHASAR
I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
I departed not and left him there.
PRINCE
Give me the letter; I will look on it.
Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
PAGE
He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
And by and by my master drew on him;
And then I ran away to call the watch.
PRINCE
This letter doth make good the friar's words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death:
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!
See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.
And I for winking at your discords too
Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.
CAPULET
O brother Montague, give me thy hand:
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Can I demand.
MONTAGUE
But I can give thee more:
For I will raise her statue in pure gold;
That while Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
CAPULET
As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
PRINCE
A glooming peace this morning with it brings;
The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.








